Without taking cheap political shots. Can we talk about COVID-19?
How will history remember the COVID-19 pandemic?
What were the successes with?
What were the failures of leadership of,
of man of humans?
Doom was a book that I was planning to write
before the pandemic struck as a history of,
of the future based in large measure on science-fiction.
It had occurred to me in 2019 that I had spent too long,
not reading science fiction.
And so I decided I would live not my,
my intake by getting off history for a bit and reading science fiction,
because history is great at telling you about the perennial problems with power.
Putin is always interesting on history.
He's become something of a historian recently with, uh, his essays and lectures,
but what history is bad at telling you is, well,
what will the effects of this continuity of technology be?
And so I thought I need some science fiction to think more about this.
Cause I'm, I'm,
I'm tending to miss the importance of technological discontinuity.
If you read a lot of science fiction, you read a lot of, of plagued books.
Cause uh, science fiction writers are really quite fond of the plagues scenario.
So the world ends in many ways in science fiction,
but one of the most popular is the lethal pandemic. So when,
when the first email came to me,
I think it was on January the third from my medical friend, Justin stabbing,
funny pneumonia and Wu Han.
My antenna began to tingle because it was just like
one of those science fiction books that begins. And just that way
in a pandemic as Larry brilliant,
the epidemiologist said many years ago,
the key is early detection and early action.
That's how you deal with a novel pathogen
and almost no Western country to that.
We know it was doable because the time and ease and the south Koreans did it and
they did it very well, but really no Western country got this right.
Some were unlucky because super spreader events happened earlier than in other
countries. Italy was hit very hard, very early for other countries.
The real disaster came quite late. Russia,
which has only relatively recently had a really bad experience.
The lesson for me is quite different from the one that most journalists
thought they were learning last year.
Most journalists last year thought Trump is a terrible president.
He's seeing a lot of crazy things.
It's his fault that we have high access mortality in the United States.
The same argument was being made by journalists in Britain, Boris Johnson,
dot.dot Brazil, Joe Ballston, scenario.dot dot, even India,
Narendra Modi, the same argument.
And I think this argument is wrong in a few ways.
It's true that the populous leaders said many crazy things and
ball Rodley speaking gave poor guidance to their, their populations.
But I don't think it's true to say that with different leaders,
these countries would have done significantly better.
If Joe Biden had magically been president a year early,
I don't think the us would have done much better because the things that caused
excess mortality last year, weren't presidential decisions.
They were auto failure of CDC to provide testing that definitely wasn't
Trump's fault. Scott Gottlieb spook makes that very clear.
It's just been published recently.
We utterly failed to use technology for contact tracing,
which the Koreans did very well.
We didn't really quarantine anybody seriously.
There was no enforcement of quarantine and we exposed the elderly to the virus
as quickly as possible and elderly care homes and feats things very little to do
with presidential and competence.
So I think leadership is of somewhat marginal
importance in a crisis like this,
because what you really need is your public health bureaucracy to get it right.
And very few Western public health bureaucracies. Got it right.
Could the president have given better leadership? Yes.
His correct strategy, however,
was to learn from Barack Obama's playbook with the opioid
epidemic,
the opioid epidemic killed as many people on Obama's watch as COVID
did on Trump's watch.
And it was worse in the sense because it only happened in the U S and each year.
It killed more people than the year before over eight years,
nobody to my knowledge ever seriously blamed Obama for the opioid epidemic.
Trump's mistake was to put himself front and center of the response to claim
that he had some unique insight into the pandemic and to say with
every passing week more and more foolish things until even a significant
portion of people who'd voted for him in 2016, realized that he'd blown it,
which was why he lost the election.
The correct strategy was actually to make Mike Pence the pandemic SAR
and get the hell out of the way. That's what my advice to Trump would have been.
In fact, it was in February of last year. So the mistake was to,
to try to lead, but actually leadership in a pandemics,
almost a contradiction in terms,
what you really need is your public health bureaucracy, not to it up.
And he really, really it up. And that was then all blamed on Trump. You know,
Jim Fallows writes a piece in the Atlantic that says, well,
being the president's like flying a light aircraft, it's pilot error. And I,
I read that piece and I thought, does he really?
After all the years he spent writing,
think that being president is like flying a light aircraft. I mean,
it's really nothing like flying a light aircraft being present is you sit on top
of a vast with how many different agencies, 60, 70, we've all lost count.
And you're surrounded by advisors. At least a quarter of whom are saying,
this is a disaster. We have to close the borders.
And then the others are saying, no, no, we have to keep the economy going.
That's what you're running on in November.
So being a president in a pandemic is a very unenviable position, uh,
because you actually can't,
you can't really determine whether your public health bureaucracy will get it
right or not.
You don't think the pushback on that just like being Churchill in a war is
difficult. So leaving Trump by in the side,
but I would love to see from a president is somebody who makes
great speeches and arouses the public to push the bureaucracy,
the public health bureaucracy, to get their together,
to fire certain kinds of people to do. I mean, I'm sorry,
but I'm a big fan of powerful speeches,
especially in the modern age with the internet. It can really move people.
Instead.
The lack of speeches resulted in certain kinds of
forces, uh,
amplifying division over whether it was wear masks or not,
or all it's like, it's,
it's almost like the public pick some random topic over which to divide
themselves. And there was like a, a complete indecision,
which is really what it was fear of the, uh,
of uncertainty materializing itself in some kind of division.
And then you almost like busy yourself with the red versus blue politics,
as opposed to some, I don't know, FDR type character just stands and say,
uh, all this that we're hearing,
we're going to manufacture 5 billion tests. This is what America is great at.
We're going to build the greatest testing infrastructure ever built or
something, or even with the vaccine development.
What I was about to interject yes. In a pandemic,
the most important thing is the vaccine. If you get that right,
then you should be forgiven for much else.
And that was the one thing that Trump administration got, right? Because, uh,
they went around the bureaucracy with operation warp speed and achieved a
really major success.
So I think the paradox of, of the,
the 2020 story in the United States is that the one thing that mattered
most the Trump administration got right. And it got so much else wrong.
That was sort of marginal that we were left with the impression that Trump had
been to blame for the whole disaster, which wasn't really quite right. Sure.
It would have been great if we did operation warp speed for testing,
but ultimately vaccines are more important than tests. And
this brings me to the question that,
that you raised there of polarization and why that happened
now in a book called the square and the tower,
I argued that it would be very costly for the United States to allow the public
sphere,
to continue be dominated by a handful of big tech companies that this ultimately
would have more adverse effects than simply contested elections.
And I think we saw over the past 18 months, uh,
just how bad this could be,
because the odd thing about this country
is that we came up with vaccines with 90 plus percent efficacy,
and about 20% of people refuse to get them and still do refuse
for reasons that seem best explained
in terms of the anti-vax network,
which has been embedded on the internet for a long time,
predating the pandemic rendered arrests or wrote about this pre 2020.
And this,
this anti-vax network has turned that to kill maybe 200,000 Americans who could
have been vaccinated,
but were persuaded through magical thinking that the vaccine was riskier
than the virus. Whereas you don't need to be an epidemiologist.
You don't need to be a medical scientist to know that the virus is at about two
orders of magnitude riskier than the vaccine. So again,
leadership could definitely have been better,
but the politicization of everything was not Trump's doing
alone.
It happened because our public sphere has been dominated by a
handful of platforms whose business model inherently
promotes polarization,
inherently promotes fake news and extreme views because those are the things
that get the eyeballs and the screens and sell the ads. I mean,
this is now commonplace,
but when one thinks about the cost of allowing this, uh,
kind of thing to happen, it's now a very high human cost.
And we were finished to leave uncorrected these structural problems in the
public sphere that were already very clearly visible in 2016.